---
layout: post
title: 2018 in 18 books             
tags: [Test, Markdown]
categories: [Blogging, Blog]
feature-img: "assets/img/pexels/book-dark.jpg"             
img: "assets/img/books/27276428.jpg  "
---

Traveling and exploring new places is something I truly cherish. I was fortunate to visit some breathtaking landscapes this year, from the serene ski slopes of Lake Tahoe, gorgeous waters of Havasupai to the towering volcanoes on the west coast. But I think I’ve traveled further than I could imagine with the books that I’ve read this year.

I started the year with the wonderful book called “Epic Measures” which talks about how it is crucial to accurately quantify the health of the world to identify the biggest problems and accordingly devise strategies to tackle them. I think this quote accurately sums up the book. “You could solve humanity’s most pressing problems, Murray believed, once you recognized them.” Quantifying the health of the world is a behemoth of a task, and the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation has taken this up as a challenge to improve health policy and outcomes around the world.
The importance of data-driven strategies is pertinent not only to healthcare but to ALL the problems we face today, which is what “Factfulness” aims to address. The premise of the book was similar to “Epic Measures.” To quote the author, “Uncontrolled, our appetite for the dramatic goes too far, prevents us from seeing the world as it is, and leads us terribly astray.” Be it climate change, poverty, health, food or education, we need an unbiased data-driven perspective to tackle the problems of today to achieve stability and peace. A lot of the media outlets lead us to believe that the world is getting worse. This book very rightly demonstrates how things are both bad but are still improving significantly, a mindset that’s very important to adopt, to see through the cloud of the dramatic narrative that surrounds us.
In addition to having a fact-based approach, another perspective that I have found to be quite helpful in understanding the world today is to learn about the past. Learning about our origins and ancestors is useful to understand our predispositions, that form the root cause of the many problems we face today. “Sapiens” by Yuval Noah Harari does precisely this! Harari is a very articulate author that brilliantly ties anthropology, biology, philosophy, history to demonstrate the progress of humanity. This book truly got me to appreciate how far we have come. Another book on similar lines was “The Third Chimpanzee” by Jared Diamond, which was by far the most gripping book I’ve read this year. This book was a more biologically intensive version of Sapiens and was written in 1993, so a lot of the author’s hypotheses about our genetic history were disproved with the discovery of well preserved ancient DNA.
The quest to learn more about the advances at the intersection of genetics and anthropology led me to the book “A Brief History of Everyone Who Ever Lived.” Before the infusion of genomics, anthropology was a field that was primarily based on loose evidence. Anthropology has now been transformed by hard evidence that is embedded right in our genomes. Scientists, therefore, have now been able to pin down the migratory patterns of our species using genomics, with high accuracy. This was by far one of the most fascinating scientific revelations I’ve read about this year.
Reading about our origins was a truly humbling experience that made me appreciate how far we have come as a species. And speaking of how far we’ve come, one of the most significant achievements of humanity is the decline in violence that has very deeply and beautifully been traced in “The Better Angels of Our Nature” by Steven Pinker. Given how the world is portrayed today, it is not intuitive to think that violence has been at its lowest ever since the dawn of humanity. The book delves into the many forms of violence, such as wars, violence against women, minorities, animals, etc. and talks about how and why all of them are in decline.
Our journey as a species is incredible as demonstrated in these books above, but the world today is changing at an incredibly fast pace. The environment around us has evolved much faster in the last few years, than ever before and our evolutionary and cultural hard wirings are unable to match that pace. It’s essential to have a framework to deal with the challenges we face today and in the coming decades. That is where “21 Lessons for the 21st Century” comes in. Yuval Noah Harari talks about some critical things that need to be carefully thought out in the near future.
While all the books above really help identify the challenges that need to be tackled today, few of them touch upon the best way to go about addressing them. In that respect, I think “Nudge” was one of the most influential books I’ve read this year. I found the idea of libertarian paternalism to be very profound. The idea is that humans are incapable of considering all possible factors involved in making a choice, so the framework chooses in such a way that the choosers are better off (paternalism), while giving them the freedom to opt out of choice (libertarian). The authors won a Nobel Prize for this idea and demonstrate its effectiveness in everything from problems at a personal level such as health and finance to global challenges such as climate change. This book really made me think about how the solutions to the most significant problems today may lie in small systemic modifications as opposed to revolutionary technological changes.
However, living in Silicon Valley, it’s hard not to think about how technological changes are transforming billions of lives around the planet. Being a recent resident of the Valley, it was interesting to read about the legacy of the Bay Area, the veterans of the VC world, saucy startup stories and learn about the Valley culture through the books “Chaos Monkeys”, “Bad Blood”, “Small Fry” and “The Hard Thing about Hard Things”.
Working in tech, where leadership is dominated mainly by men and coming from a culture that tends to be patriarchal, it’s easy to internalize shortcomings as personal flaws when in fact many women at large face the same issues every day. “Lean In” by Sheryl Sandberg was absolutely instrumental in addressing these “flaws” and bolstering my confidence. “We Should All Be Feminists” by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, was inspirational as well. It was very calming to go back to the takeaways from these books especially during the latter half of 2018, which saw the #MeToo movement rise to its peak. It was bittersweet, cathartic and heartbreaking at the same time, to read and personally recount the stories of abuse tumbled out after eons of internalized shame. However, I think 2018 stirred up some critical discussions around feminism and sexism, that were long overdue, and I’ll take that as a small win.

I do sometimes feel that thinking about the larger problems of the world, helps placate the “turmoil” within. However, a lot of these books mentioned above, also talk about changes at a personal level that lead to a more fulfilling life. I read some phenomenal books that loosely fall into the “self-help” category. “The Power of Habit” talks about how small incremental changes can make a big difference. I started making my bed every day since I read the book, which was the biggest tangible takeaway. As an irregular running enthusiast, I also enjoyed reading “What I Talk About When I Talk About Running” by none other than Haruki Murakami, where he delves deep into his penchant for running and how this discipline has shaped his career and life. I also picked up “The Courage to Be Disliked” and the “The Book of Joy” to gain a better perspective of “happiness.” These books were both conversational in style and phenomenal. The common themes that ran through these books were the criticism of “individualistic” thinking that pervades a large part of the western society while advocating “collectivism,” where being an active member of communities leads to more fulfilling lives. These are themes that I intend to explore further in the years to come.
As a kid, I was perpetually stuck to books but lost that habit when “life happened.” However, consciously trying to regain this habit over the last few months has been an enriching experience. Books indeed take you further than you can ever hope to go. I enjoyed rediscovering my love for books with these 18 beautiful reads in 2018 and wish to continue this in the years to come.